--- Page 1 ---
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Transportation Research Part C
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trc
 
Decision-focused learning for optimal subsidy allocation in 
ride-hailing services$
Jiaqi Yang a, Lexiao Chen a, Zicheng Su a
,∗, Wanjing Ma a, Zhichao Zou b, Kun An a
,∗
a The Key Laboratory of Road and Traffic Engineering of the Ministry of Education, Tongji University, 4800 Cao’an 
Road, Shanghai 201804, China
b Didi Chuxing, Beijing, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Subsidy allocation
Decision-focused learning
Smart predict-then-optimize
Surrogate loss function
Ride-hailing services
 
A B S T R A C T
Effective subsidy strategies are essential for ride-hailing platforms. The key is to accurately 
predict trip completion rates before determining the optimal subsidy decision. However, the 
classic predict-then-optimize framework often falls short due to discrepancies between the 
prediction model, which minimizes fitting error, and the decision model, which minimizes 
decision error. To tackle the above issues, this paper presents a decision-focused learning 
(DFL) approach for optimal subsidy allocation in ride-hailing services at the city level. First, 
we formulate the subsidy allocation as a bi-level optimization problem, in which the lower-
level individual distribution can be approximated via a threshold-based strategy. Moreover, 
the effect of the subsidy is explicitly modeled, which considers the combined impacts of 
both pricing and matching aspects. Second, the prediction model for the completion rate is 
trained to directly minimize downstream decision loss, integrating the prediction module and 
optimization task in an end-to-end manner. To address the challenge of conducting gradient 
backpropagation from the decision model to the prediction model, we utilize a surrogate 
decision-focused loss function, whose convexity in the context of the subsidy allocation problem 
is theoretically proven. Third, we develop a decision-focused fine-tuning mechanism to handle 
the non-differentiable prediction model, allowing any upstream prediction model to be adjusted 
based on the downstream decision loss. The proposed DFL framework is tested on real-world 
data from DiDi Chuxing. Results show that decision-focused learning can increase platform 
revenue by 1.51% compared to traditional predict-then-optimize solutions, as the prediction 
model effectively learns the weights of different cities in the decision objective.
1. Introduction
Ride-hailing services are reshaping the transportation system by providing convenient and reliable alternatives for travel-
ers (Courcoubetis et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2024). For ride-hailing platforms, subsidy allocation is a crucial component of their 
marketing strategies (Wang and Yang, 2019). On one hand, subsidies serve as an effective method for acquiring new customers and 
retaining existing ones. On the other hand, they consume a significant portion of the operational budget for these platforms (Tang 
et al., 2023).
$ This article belongs to the Virtual Special Issue on "platform-based mobility".
∗Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: 2410196@tongji.edu.cn (J. Yang), 2154180@tongji.edu.cn (L. Chen), suzicheng@tongji.edu.cn (Z. Su), mawanjing@tongji.edu.cn 
(W. Ma), zouzhichao@didiglobal.com (Z. Zou), kunan@tongji.edu.cn (K. An).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2025.105301
Received 30 December 2024; Received in revised form 1 August 2025; Accepted 10 August 2025
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
Available online 28 August 2025 
0968-090X/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 


--- Page 2 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 1. Multi-level process for subsidy allocation in ride-hailing platforms.
The subsidy allocation for ride-hailing services is typically a multi-level process, as illustrated in Fig. 1. For instance, in DiDi’s 
operations, subsidies are initially distributed across a set of cities or regions within a specified daily budget. Within each city, the 
allocation is further divided by time periods, ultimately leading to individual-level subsidies in the form of coupons received by 
passengers when using the service. Within the pipeline, the macroscopic allocation at the city level is crucial, as it incorporates the 
characteristics and prior knowledge of each city into the decision-making process (Asadpour et al., 2020). Moreover, the macroscopic 
distribution also enables subsequent procedures to operate within a smaller decision space, thereby reducing the complexity of 
individual-level subsidy allocation tasks (Wu et al., 2022; Liu and Hou, 2023; Yan et al., 2023). However, current studies on subsidy 
allocation primarily focus on the individual level for drivers or passengers (e.g., Zhu et al., 2021; Tafreshian and Masoud, 2022), 
neglecting the aggregated perspective. Therefore, it is essential to develop an effective subsidy allocation strategy for ride-hailing 
platforms from a macroscopic viewpoint, particularly at the city level.
There are three main challenges for deriving the optimal subsidy allocation decisions at the city level. The first is to accurately 
measure the impact of subsidies on the system dynamics considering passenger behaviors (Mo et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023). One 
common approach for modeling the effects of subsidies is to assume a constant conversion rate. For example, Albert and Goldenberg 
(2022) use a static uplift model to measure the outcome of subsidies on revenue for an e-commerce platform. Similarly, Wang 
et al. (2023) adopt a multi-treatment effect estimation model with monotonic constraints to assess user responsiveness to online 
bonuses. However, the workflow of ride-hailing services involves a complex pipeline, including bubbling, order requests, vehicle 
dispatch, and completion, with passenger behavior influenced by multiple factors (Tirachini, 2020). Consequently, it is essential to 
accurately predict the effects of subsidies on ride-hailing services across different cities with heterogeneous features. Based on these 
predictions, optimal subsidy decisions can then be derived. This falls into the category of the classic two-stage predict-then-optimize 
problem (Bertsimas and Kallus, 2020).
Secondly, it is crucial to address the mismatch between the upstream prediction model and the downstream optimization task due 
to differing objectives. A typical solution for the upstream prediction model involves training with generalized loss functions, such 
as Mean Squared Error (MSE), to minimize fitting error. This process is referred to as Prediction-focused Learning (PFL; Mandi et al., 
2023). However, a better prediction in terms of reduced fitting error does not necessarily guarantee better decisions (Donti et al., 
2017). In other words, the decision performance driven by the PFL framework cannot be improved in a ‘‘closed-loop’’. Recently, 
a novel approach known as Decision-focused Learning (DFL), also referred to as Smart Predict-Then-Optimize (SPO), has emerged 
as a promising solution to this obstacle. The core idea is to train the prediction model directly using the downstream decision 
loss, effectively bridging the gap between the prediction and decision models (Sadana et al., 2024). Specifically, the decision loss 
represents the cost (regret) incurred by biased predictions compared to the ground truth (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022). It is 
noteworthy that DFL has demonstrated its competence across various domains, including maritime transportation (Tian et al., 2023), 
bike relocation (Chang et al., 2023), and power systems (Li et al., 2024). Therefore, it is promising to develop a DFL-based subsidy 
allocation framework for ride-hailing platforms.
The third challenge is to develop an appropriate DFL framework for subsidy allocation in ride-hailing platforms, especially when 
dealing with non-differentiable prediction models. Mainstream training schemes for DFL primarily focus on first-order gradient-based 
methods (e.g., Amos and Kolter, 2017; Agrawal et al., 2019; Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022; Berthet et al., 2020). However, some 
well-established prediction models, such as tree-based models, are non-differentiable (Breiman, 2001). Additionally, in ride-hailing 
platforms, white-box or semi-black-box simulation models are commonly used for prediction (Banerjee et al., 2020; Wu et al., 
2022), as these models can explicitly provide state transitions between variables and offer robust estimates based on physical laws. 
Nonetheless, it remains unclear how to effectively apply DFL in scenarios involving non-differentiable backbones.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
2 


--- Page 3 ---
J. Yang et al.
Table 1
Nomenclature.
 Notation
Definition
 
 Set
 = {1, 2, … 𝑖, … , 𝐼}
Set of cities
 
 = {1, 2, … , 𝑡, … , 𝑇}
Set of days
 
 = {1, 2, … , 𝑗, … , 𝐽}
Set of passengers in a city
 
 Parameter
 ̄𝐺𝑖
The GMV of city 𝑖 when there is no subsidy
 
 𝑝𝑖
The net profit margin of city 𝑖
 
 𝜆
Weight of the cost-related objective in objective function
 
 𝐵
The total budget of all cities one day
 
 𝑟𝑙𝑏
The lower bound of the subsidy rate for all cities
 
 𝑟𝑢𝑏
The upper bound of the subsidy rate for all cities
 
 𝑣𝑖𝑗
The average order value of user 𝑗 in city 𝑖
 
 𝑢𝑖𝑗
The subsidy budget allocated to user 𝑗 in city 𝑖
 
 𝜏𝑖𝑗
The expected return of subsidy for user 𝑗 in city 𝑖
 
 𝒙𝒊
𝐷-dimensional contextual feature vector of the market environment of city 𝑖 
 Variable
 𝜋𝑖𝑗
Binary variable, 𝜋𝑖𝑗 equals to 1 if user 𝑗 in city 𝑖 receives a subsidy, 0
 
 𝑏𝑖
The subsidy amount for city 𝑖 allocation policy for city 𝑖
 
 Function
 𝑧(⋅, ⋅)
The objective function of subsidy allocation problem
 
 𝐺𝑖
The GMV of city 𝑖
 
 𝑃𝑖
The net income of city 𝑖
 
 𝛤𝑖
The gross bookings of city 𝑖
 
 𝑓(⋅)
The elasticity function that reflects the improvement of the ordering rate.  
 Predicted parameter
 𝑐𝑖
The trip completion rate of city 𝑖
 
 Decision variable
 𝑟𝑖
The subsidy rate for city 𝑖
 
 Prediction model
 𝑴𝜽
Backbone prediction model with parameter 𝜽
 
 𝑭𝜶
Bias correction model with parameter 𝜶
 
To address the challenges outlined above, this paper proposes a decision-focused learning approach for optimal subsidy allocation 
at the city level. We first formulate the subsidy allocation as a bi-level optimization problem, in which the upper level determines 
the city-level subsidy rate and the lower level derives individual distribution plans. We then present the approximation of the 
lower-level solution and transform the optimization task into a single level. After that, we explicitly model the effect of subsidies 
by disentangling the transaction flow based on real-world scenarios, which allows us to consider the combined impacts of both the 
pricing and matching aspects. Second, the prediction model for the completion rate is directly trained to minimize downstream 
decision loss, rather than relying on generalized loss functions that minimize fitting error. In this way, the prediction module and 
optimization task are integrated in an end-to-end manner. To address the difficulty of gradient backpropagation from the decision 
loss to the prediction model, we utilize a surrogate loss function named SPO+ loss (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022), and its convexity 
in the context of the subsidy allocation problem is theoretically proven. Third, we further develop a decision-focused fine-tuning 
(DFF) approach to handle the non-differentiable prediction model that includes a simulation component. The fine-tuning mechanism 
enforces the decision loss with an additional bias correction layer, embedding DFL into the predict-then-optimize pipeline without 
directly altering the prediction model. The proposed DFL framework is tested on real-world data from DiDi. Results show that 
decision-focused learning can improve platform revenue by 1.51% compared to traditional predict-then-optimize solutions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formulate the optimization problem of the subsidy allocation 
task. In Section 3, we introduce the transaction link decomposition of the ride-hailing platform and propose the prediction problem. 
Section 4 presents the decision-focused learning framework, where the prediction model can be directly trained via decision loss. 
Section 5 introduces a fine-tuning technique that can work with the non-differentiable prediction model. Section 6 discusses the 
case study conducted using a real-world dataset from DiDi Chuxing, China. Finally, we provide conclusions and outline future work 
in Section 7.
2. Problem formulation
This section discusses the city-level subsidy allocation problem based on the real-world operations of the ride-hailing platform. 
Specifically, Section 2.1 outlines the problem settings and assumptions related to the subsidy issue. Section 2.2 formulates the 
optimal subsidy allocation problem as a bi-level optimization model, which coordinates the macro (city) and micro (individual) 
level subsidy policies. Section 2.3 reduces the bi-level formulation into a single-level optimization problem with a nearly optimal 
approximation of the lower level. For clarity, the key notation is summarized in Table 1.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
3 


--- Page 4 ---
J. Yang et al.
2.1. Problem settings
Effective allocation of the subsidy budget among different cities at the macroscopic level is crucial for the operations of ride-
hailing platforms. On one hand, the ride-hailing market tends to be similar within the same city, allowing passengers and drivers to 
form natural clusters (Gomez et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021). Therefore, analyzing the subsidy outcomes at the macroscopic level is 
effective and straightforward. On the other hand, city-level allocation is the first step in the multi-level distribution process, as shown 
in Fig. 1. If the allocation plan deviates from the optimum at this initial step, it could undermine the effectiveness of downstream 
distribution plans.
In practice, ride-hailing platforms must make daily decisions on how to allocate a fixed total budget 𝐵 across a set of cities 
within  for a given day 𝑡 in advance. Before presenting the formulation of the optimization problem, we outline the following mild 
assumptions to aid the analysis of the subsidy allocation problem at the city level:
• Perfect execution of subsidy decisions: The daily subsidy allocation in each city is executed flawlessly, without accounting 
for any implementation errors.
• Temporal independence: The subsidy strategy applied in a city on a given day does not influence the market conditions in 
that city on the following day.
• Spatial independence: The ride-hailing markets in different cities operate independently, meaning that the subsidy strategy 
implemented in one city does not impact the outcomes in other cities. This aligns with the Stable Unit Treatment Value 
Assumption (SUTVA) used in causal inference (Rubin, 2005).
In the following section, we will present the formulation of the optimization model. To enhance readability, we omit the 
superscript for the index of day 𝑡 without loss of generality.
2.2. Bi-level optimization model for subsidy allocation
In this work, we formulate the subsidy allocation problem as a bi-level optimization model. The city-level subsidy allocation, 
which we primarily focus on, can be regarded as the upper-level problem, while the process of allocating the given subsidy budget to 
individual (potential) passengers within each city represents the lower-level problem. The bi-level optimization problem is defined 
as follows: 
𝑧(𝒓, 𝒄) =
max
𝒓
∑
𝑖∈
(𝐺𝑖+ 𝜆𝑃𝑖
) ,
(1a)
s.t.
𝐺𝑖= 𝛷(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝜋∗
𝑖),
∀𝑖∈
(1b)
∑
𝑖∈
𝑏𝑖≤𝐵,
(1c)
𝑟𝑙𝑏≤𝑟𝑖≤𝑟𝑢𝑏,
∀𝑖∈
(1d)
𝜋∗
𝑖= arg max
𝜋∈𝛱(𝑟𝑖) 𝛤𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝜋𝑖),
∀𝑖∈
(1e)
where the upper-level decision variable 𝒓= {𝑟1, … , 𝑟𝑖, … , 𝑟𝐼} represents the subsidy rate for city 𝑖, and 𝝅= {𝜋1, … , 𝜋𝑖, … , 𝜋𝐼} denotes 
the lower-level distribution plans at the individual level of city 𝑖. Moreover, 𝒄= {𝑐1, … , 𝑐𝑖, … , 𝑐𝐼} denotes the trip completion rates 
that need to be predicted. Illustrations of each component of the bi-level formulation Eq. (1) is presented below.
Objective functions:  In this work, the city-level subsidy allocation problem is formulated as a multi-objective problem as 
depicted in Eq. (1a), which aims at maximizing the total Gross Merchandise Value (GMV) 𝐺𝑖 and the net income 𝑃𝑖 across all cities 
𝑖∈. This design is based on the rationale that the GMV objective encourages increased demand through subsidies, while the net 
income objective ensures that subsidy decisions do not lead to revenue loss. Here, 𝜆 is the trade-off parameter that balances the two 
objectives. In real-world operations, the net income 𝑃𝑖 can be derived from the GMV as follows: 
𝑃𝑖= 𝐺𝑖⋅𝑝𝑖,
(2)
where 𝑝𝑖 denotes the net profit margin of city 𝑖. Specifically, the parameter 𝑝𝑖 is associated with the characteristics of the city and 
can be calibrated from historical data.
In this context, the key of obtaining the objective function is to calculate the city-level GMV 𝐺𝑖, which involves defining a proper 
form of the function 𝛷. In the literature, the GMV of ride-hailing services is calculated in various ways, ranging from individual 
aggregations (Chen et al., 2023) to network-level approximations (Chen et al., 2024). In this work, the city-level GMV is defined as 
the sum of a constant ̄𝐺𝑖 and a subsidy-related function 𝛥𝐺𝑖 such that: 
𝛷(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝜋𝑖) = ̄𝐺𝑖+ 𝛥𝐺𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝜋𝑖),
(3)
Specifically, the constant ̄𝐺𝑖 represents the baseline volume of GMV for city 𝑖 without providing subsidies. This constant can be 
calibrated using historical market data for each city. Moreover, 𝛥𝐺𝑖 quantifies the effect of the subsidy rate 𝑟𝑖 on the change in 
GMV. The detailed modeling on 𝛥𝐺𝑖 is presented in Section 3.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
4 


--- Page 5 ---
J. Yang et al.
As for the lower-level optimization problem depicted in Eq. (1e), it aims to maximize the Gross Bookings (GB) in each city 𝑖, 
which is a measure of how much business is issued on the platform (Chen et al., 2024). The detailed formulation of the lower level 
is provided in Section 2.3.
Constraints on subsidy:  The constraint shown in Eq. (1c) specifies that the total subsidy amount 𝑏𝑖 for all cities must not 
exceed the predefined budget 𝐵. Additionally, the decision variable 𝑟𝑖 is bounded by the predefined lower limit 𝑟𝑙𝑏 and upper limit 
𝑟𝑢𝑏, as specified in Eq. (1e). Given the calibrated value ̄𝐺𝑖 for each city 𝑖, the relationship between the subsidy rate 𝑟𝑖 and the subsidy 
amount 𝑏𝑖 is expressed as: 
𝑏𝑖= ̄𝐺𝑖⋅𝑟𝑖,
∀𝑖∈.
(4)
This indicates that the subsidy amount for city 𝑖 is calculated based on the baseline GMV volume ̄𝐺𝑖.
By substituting Eqs. (2) and (3) into the original objective function Eq. (1a), the objective function 𝑧(⋅) becomes: 
𝑧(𝒓, 𝒄) =
∑
𝑖∈
(1 + 𝜆𝑝𝑖
) ( ̄𝐺𝑖+ 𝛥𝐺𝑖
) ,
(5)
Since ̄𝐺𝑖 is a constant and does not influence the optimality of the solution, we perform a coordinate transformation. 
Consequently, the optimization task presented in Eq. (1) can be reformulated as: 
max
𝑧(𝒓, 𝒄) =
∑
𝑖∈
(1 + 𝜆𝑝𝑖)𝛥𝐺𝑖,
(6a)
s.t.
𝛥𝐺𝑖= 𝜙(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝜋∗
𝑖),
∀𝑖∈
(6b)
∑
𝑖∈
̄𝐺𝑖⋅𝑟𝑖≤𝐵,
(6c)
𝑟𝑙𝑏≤𝑟𝑖≤𝑟𝑢𝑏,
∀𝑖∈
(6d)
𝜋∗
𝑖= arg max
𝜋∈𝛱(𝑟𝑖) 𝛤𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝜋𝑖),
∀𝑖∈
(6e)
 where 𝜙 represents the function that determines the uplift in the GMV under a given subsidy policy. It is intuitive from Eq. (6) that 
the subsidy allocation decision aims to maximize the weighted sum of the changes in GMV for all the cities. Therefore, the main 
task is to explicitly model the effect of the subsidy on the city-wide GMV, specifically to obtain the exact form of 𝛥𝐺𝑖.
2.3. Decomposition to single-level optimization with lower-level approximation
Although Eq. (6) offers an elegant formulation of a bi-level optimization problem, solving it remains a challenging task. This 
difficulty arises from the fact that the optimal solution for the lower-level individual distribution is nearly intractable. The reasons 
are twofold: (1) Explicitly modeling individual behavior in conjunction with the subsidy policy is inherently complex. (2) Customer 
arrivals occur sequentially and cannot be determined a priori, making it impossible to incorporate them into the city-level policy 
decisions in advance.
In this section, we demonstrate that, in practice, the optimal individual-level policy 𝜋∗
𝑖 can be effectively approximated using 
a threshold-based policy determined by the city-level subsidy rate 𝑟𝑖. Consequently, the bi-level optimization problem can be 
approximately reformulated as a single-level optimization problem (Zhou et al., 2023).
To begin, we consider the set of potential passengers, denoted as , within city 𝑖. Let 𝜋𝑖𝑗 represent the subsidy decision for each 
potential passenger 𝑗. This decision is expressed as a binary variable such that:
𝜋𝑖𝑗=
{
1
if passenger 𝑗 receives a subsidy,
0
otherwise.
Here, 𝜋𝑖= [𝜋𝑖𝑗] denotes the subsidy allocation policy at the individual level within city 𝑖.
Furthermore, we define the expected value of orders, 𝑉𝑖𝑗, generated by providing a subsidy to passenger 𝑗, and the expected 
budget (cost), 𝑈𝑖𝑗, incurred due to the subsidy, as follows:
𝑉𝑖𝑗= E [𝑣𝑖𝑗∣𝜋𝑖𝑗= 1] −E [𝑣𝑖𝑗∣𝜋𝑖𝑗= 0] ,
𝑈𝑖𝑗= E [𝑢𝑖𝑗∣𝜋𝑖𝑗= 1] −E [𝑢𝑖𝑗∣𝜋𝑖𝑗= 0] ,
where 𝑣𝑖𝑗 and 𝑢𝑖𝑗 denote the average order value of passenger 𝑗 and the subsidy budget allocated to passenger 𝑗, respectively.
In this way, the optimal subsidy allocation policy 𝜋∗
𝑖 for each city 𝑖 can be determined by solving the following optimization 
problem: 
𝛤𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝜋𝑖) = max
𝜋𝑖
∑
𝑗∈
𝑉𝑖𝑗𝜋𝑖𝑗
(7a)
s.t.
∑
𝑗∈
𝑈𝑖𝑗𝜋𝑖𝑗≤𝑏𝑖
(7b)
which aims to maximize the Gross Bookings for all potential passengers, subject to the constraint that the total subsidy does not 
exceed the given budget 𝑏𝑖.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
5 


--- Page 6 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 2. The threshold-based strategy for the low-level subsidy allocation problem.
It is important to note that the optimization problem outlined in Eq. (7) is a classic static knapsack problem. However, solving 
this problem is intractable in practice due to the real-time nature of passenger bubbling, which requires immediate decision-making 
rather than solving a static problem with given demand patterns. Consequently, a common approach is to employ a threshold-based 
greedy algorithm to approximate the optimal solution (Hao et al., 2020). We first define the expected return of subsidy for passenger 
𝑗 denoted as 𝜏𝑖𝑗 as follows: 
𝜏𝑖𝑗=
𝑉𝑖𝑗
𝑈𝑖𝑗
(8)
Since the subsidy cost 𝑈𝑖𝑗 associated with each user 𝑗 is significantly smaller than the total city-level budget 𝑏𝑖, the optimal solution 
to Eq. (7) can be approximated using a greedy solution with a threshold-based mechanism, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Let 𝜏∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖) denote the threshold for the expected return of subsidies for passengers under the city-level subsidy policy 𝑟𝑖. The 
greedy algorithm can be implemented by evaluating each user against this threshold as follows: 
𝜋∗
𝑖𝑗= 𝟏𝜏𝑖𝑗≥𝜏∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖),
(9)
where 𝜋𝑖𝑗 is set to 1 if the cost-performance ratio 𝜏𝑖𝑗 meets or exceeds the threshold 𝜏∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖), and 0 otherwise.
In this way, the lower-level distribution policy is transformed into a process of verifying the threshold for each potential customer, 
ensuring that only those who meet the threshold criterion are selected. Furthermore, it is important to note that for a single city, 
the threshold 𝜏∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖) is solely determined by the upper-level subsidy action 𝑟𝑖. Therefore, the lower-level optimal policy 𝜋∗
𝑖 can be 
regarded as a function of 𝑟𝑖 with a one-to-one mapping, denoted as 𝜋∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖).
Finally, the bi-level optimization problem presented in Eq. (6) can be reduced to a single-level problem by incorporating the 
nearly optimal approximation 𝜋∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖) of the lower-level policy, as follows: 
max
𝑧(𝒓, 𝒄) =
∑
𝑖∈
(1 + 𝜆𝑝𝑖)𝛥𝐺𝑖,
(10a)
s.t.
𝛥𝐺𝑖= 𝜙(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝜋∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖)),
∀𝑖∈
(10b)
∑
𝑖∈
̄𝐺𝑖⋅𝑟𝑖≤𝐵,
(10c)
𝑟𝑙𝑏≤𝑟𝑖≤𝑟𝑢𝑏,
∀𝑖∈
(10d)
 It should be noted that, since 𝜋∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖) is solely determined by 𝑟𝑖 as shown in Eq. (9), the relationship between the upper-level policy 
𝑟𝑖 and the lower-level policy 𝜋𝑖 can be directly modeled via the formulation of the function 𝜙. In other words, the modeling of 𝛥𝐺
can inherently incorporate the lower-level response to the subsidy rate 𝑟𝑖. Therefore, we can abbreviate 𝛥𝐺𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖, 𝜋∗
𝑖(𝑟𝑖)) as 𝛥𝐺𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖)
in the following discussion without loss of generality, and the explicit modeling of 𝛥𝐺𝑖 will be provided in the following section.
3. Modeling the effect of subsidy
In this section, to further analyze the effect of city-level subsidies, we introduce a transaction link decomposition based on real-
world scenarios and thereby identify the key parameters influencing subsidy allocation decisions. Specifically, Section 3.1 explicitly 
models the effects of the subsidy on system dynamics. Additionally, Section 3.2 introduces the prediction model used to estimate 
the unknown parameters.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
6 


--- Page 7 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 3. Illustration of the transaction link of the ride-hailing service.
3.1. The transaction link of the ride-hailing service
To model the effect of the subsidy on the GMV of the city, we first rewrite the definition of GMV 𝐺𝑖 shown in Eq. (3) as follows: 
𝐺𝑖= ̄𝐺𝑖
[1 + 𝜑𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖)] ,
(11)
where the function 𝜙𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖) denotes the ratio of the change in GMV of city 𝑖. Here, the function 𝜑𝑖 represents the compounded effect 
of the pricing side (influenced by the subsidy rate 𝑟𝑖) and the matching side (affected by the completion rate 𝑐𝑖). However, directly 
calibrating the functional form of 𝜑𝑖(⋅) is challenging, as it encompasses the entire transaction process, and the interactions between 
pricing and matching are implicitly intertwined (Castillo et al., 2024).
Therefore, the key to explicitly modeling the effect of the subsidy on ride-hailing behavior is to disentangle the transaction link 
of the ‘‘order-to-completion’’ process. Fig. 3 depicts the transaction link of the ride-hailing service. We can note that there are three 
main steps: (1) ‘‘Bubbling’’ event, which represents each time a passenger opens the ride-hailing app; (2) Issued order, which 
indicates that the passenger has requested a service; and (3) Order completion, where the service is successfully fulfilled and the 
trip is completed.
For the first transition from the bubbling event to an issued order, the expense of the trip (i.e., the pricing side) is commonly 
regarded as the key influencing factor (Feng et al., 2024). In other words, the amount of subsidy can motivate a passenger to request 
a service, thereby converting a potential passenger into someone who orders a trip (Zhang et al., 2023). As for the second transition 
from an issued order to trip completion, it is generally affected by the demand-supply ratio and the cancellation rate (Xu et al., 
2020), which falls within the scope of matching (Fielbaum and Alonso-Mora, 2020; Liang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Chang et al., 
2022; Zhu et al., 2024; Guan and Bao, 2024). In this way, the rate of change in GMV 𝜑𝑖(⋅) can be further decoupled as follows: 
𝜑𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖) = 𝑓(𝑟𝑖) ⋅𝑐𝑖,
(12)
where 𝑓(𝑟𝑖) can be regarded as the improvement of the ordering rate, which can be regarded as the rate of surplus passengers who 
are successfully incentivized by the subsidy. Moreover, 𝑐𝑖 denotes the completion rate of the orders within city 𝑖. This indicates that 
while the subsidy rate can increase the order rate of potential passengers, only a portion of these requests transfer into completed 
orders due to the prevailing supply and demand conditions in the city.
Based on Eqs. (12), (11) can be rewritten as: 
𝐺𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖) = ̄𝐺𝑖
[1 + 𝑓(𝑟𝑖)𝑐𝑖
] ,
(13)
Moreover, the change in GMV 𝛥𝐺𝑖 can be expressed as: 
𝛥𝐺𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖) = ̄𝐺𝑖𝑓(𝑟𝑖)𝑐𝑖,
(14)
To obtain the value of 𝛥𝐺𝑖, it is essential to calibrate the functional form of 𝑓(⋅) and predict the completion rate of each 𝑐𝑖. While 
the prediction process for 𝑐𝑖 will be discussed in Section 3.2, we first address the task of calibrating 𝑓(⋅).
In practice, the functional form of 𝑓(⋅) can be user-defined, depending on the characteristics of the specific problem and the 
underlying data distribution. In this paper, we adopt a logarithmic form of 𝑓(⋅) as follows: 
𝑓(𝑟𝑖) = 𝛽1 ln(𝛽2𝑟𝑖+ 1),
∀𝑖∈
(15)
where 𝛽1 and 𝛽2 are the parameters to be calibrated. The logarithmic function is employed here because it effectively represents the 
principle of the transaction market, where the effect of subsidy 𝑟𝑖 on the change in GMV follows the increasing trend but is subject 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
7 


--- Page 8 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 4. Illustration of the calibrated curve of function 𝑓(⋅).
to decreasing marginal returns. In this work, all cities 𝑖∈ share the same functional form and parameter values of 𝑓(⋅). However, 
the proposed model is generic and can be extended to scenarios where cities have different function parameters, provided that these 
parameters can be accurately fitted.
The calibration of the parameters 𝛽1 and 𝛽2 falls within the domain of causal inference, specifically aiming to accurately isolate 
the effect of subsidies on GMV amid various other influencing factors (Rubin, 2005). An effective approach to achieve this is through 
A/B test (Wager and Xu, 2021; Xie et al., 2023), and the detailed procedure is outlined in Appendix A. Moreover, an illustration of 
the real-world data and its calibrated curve with a logarithmic function is presented in Fig. 4.
Remark 3.1. It is intuitive that errors can occur in both the calibration of 𝑓(⋅) and the prediction of the completion rate 𝑐𝑖
when calculating 𝛥𝐺𝑖(𝑟𝑖, 𝑐𝑖) through Eq. (14). However, this paper focuses mainly on the prediction errors introduced by 𝑐𝑖 in the 
decision-focused learning framework, as we argue that the precision of 𝑓(⋅) can be guaranteed for the following reasons:
1. Prior knowledge-aided function design: Fundamental principles of the transaction market (e.g., diminishing marginal 
returns to subsidies) can guide the specification of 𝑓(⋅), thereby ensuring the calibration accuracy.
2. Stable user behavior against external factors: While 𝑓(⋅) captures stable and aggregated user behavior, 𝑐𝑖 exhibits 
higher sensitivity to both endogenous market factors (e.g., demand-supply ratio) and exogenous disturbances (e.g., weather, 
holidays).
3. Substantially smaller fitting error via actual field test: This work calibrates the function 𝑓(⋅) based on large-scale A/B test 
conducted on real-world user populations. We report the comparison of both absolute error (MSE) and relative error (MAPE) 
between 𝑓(⋅) and the parameter 𝑐 in Table A.3. The relative error of 𝑓(⋅) is substantially lower than that of 𝑐, indicating the 
reliability and accuracy of the calibrated function 𝑓(⋅).
3.2. Prediction problem
The primary task of the prediction problem for subsidy allocation is to predict the trip completion rate 𝑐𝑖 of cities 𝑖∈. The 
abstract form of the prediction model can be expressed as follows: 
̂𝑐𝑖= 𝑴𝜽(𝒙𝒊)
(16)
where 𝑴𝜽 denotes the prediction model parameterized by 𝜽, and 𝒙𝑖 represents the features of city 𝑖 with 𝒙∈R𝐷. Although numerous 
methods utilize statistical models or machine learning techniques to predict time series variables (e.g., Liu et al., 2022b; Chen et al., 
2022), confidence in these predictions may be low at large spatio-temporal scales (Liu et al., 2022a). In real-world scenarios, the 
city-level order completion rate 𝑐𝑖 exhibits significant stochasticity, as it is influenced by both endogenous features of the transaction 
market, such as the supply–demand ratio, and exogenous factors (e.g., weather, day of the week, etc.) (Jin et al., 2020).
One reliable approach to tackle the above challenge is to use semi-black-box simulation models that incorporate physical 
principles extracted from real-world scenarios. Banerjee et al. (2020). These models can explicitly provide state transitions 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
8 


--- Page 9 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 5. Illustration of the semi-black box prediction model.
between variables, offering robust estimates in the presence of many unobserved confounding variables. In this work, we adopt 
a semi-black-box simulation model as shown in Fig. 5. It consists of three main components described as follows:
• Simulation model with transaction laws: This module simulates the dynamics of the demand-supply ratios in the transaction 
market through transition laws of operational principles. The endogenous features include the online durations of drivers on 
the supply side and the number of orders on the demand side. It then outputs a base prediction of the trip completion rate.
• Pre-trained neural network for city characteristics: This module is a pre-trained neural network that is fed embeddings of 
exogenous features, such as the time of day, day of the week, whether it is a holiday, and weather conditions. The module 
then outputs the residual to refine the base prediction.
• Interaction layer: Given the outputs from the simulation model and the neural network module, the interaction layer fuses the 
base prediction and residual and outputs the final prediction value of ̂𝑐.
The prediction framework shown in Fig. 5 is widely adopted by DiDi in real-world operations and is capable of delivering robust 
and accurate prediction results. However, the semi-black-box simulation model becomes non-differentiable, which poses additional 
challenges for training via gradient-based methods.
After obtaining the predicted results ̂𝒄, these can be used as input to derive the optimal subsidy allocation problem downstream 
to the following optimization problem, which aims to obtain the optimal subsidy allocation plan 𝒓∗(̂𝒄) such that: 
𝒓∗(̂𝒄) = argmax
𝒓
∑
𝑖∈
(1 + 𝜆𝑝𝑖) ̄𝐺𝑖𝑓(𝑟𝑖)̂𝑐𝑖,
(17a)
s.t.
∑
𝑖∈
̄𝐺𝑖⋅𝑟𝑖≤𝐵,
(17b)
𝑟𝑙𝑏≤𝑟𝑖≤𝑟𝑢𝑏,
∀𝑖∈
(17c)
4. Decision-focused learning framework
In this section, we propose a decision-focused learning approach for the subsidy allocation problem. Specifically, Section 4.1 
introduces the concept of decision-focused learning (DFL) and the decision loss function based on decision regret. Section 4.2 
presents the surrogate loss function, which is convex for gradient calculation. Lastly, Section 4.3 provides a qualitative analysis 
of the applicability of the surrogate loss function to subsidy allocation problems.
4.1. Decision-focused loss function based on decision regret
For the two-stage problem that involves a prediction model 𝑀𝜃 upstream and a decision model 𝑧(⋅) downstream, the prediction-
focused learning (PFL) method is a widely used approach (e.g., Liu et al., 2021). This approach is characterized by the independent 
handling of the prediction and decision modules, as illustrated in Fig. 6. Specifically, in PFL, the prediction model is trained to 
minimize generalized fitting metrics such as MSE. The core assumption behind is that a smaller fitting error (e.g., MSE) necessarily 
leads to better decision performance. However, this assumption does not always hold, as the prediction model is not trained with 
consideration for the objectives of downstream decision-making (Mandi et al., 2023).
In recent years, decision-focused learning has been introduced to address the limitations of prediction-focused learning. The 
core concept behind DFL is to treat the two-stage predict-then-optimize problem in an end-to-end manner (Donti et al., 2017). In 
this framework, the prediction model 𝑀𝜃 is trained to directly enhance decision performance. To achieve this, we first present the 
decision-focused loss function, also known as the decision regret, introduced by Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022): 
𝑳(̂𝒄, 𝒄) = 𝑧(𝒓∗(𝒄), 𝒄) −𝑧(𝒓∗(̂𝒄), 𝒄)
(18)
The loss function depicted in Eq. (18) can be interpreted as decision regret, which quantifies the gap between the objective 
function values obtained from the realized optimal solution 𝒓∗(̂𝒄) based on the predicted parameters ̂𝒄, and its theoretically optimal 
value under perfect information, represented by 𝒓∗(𝒄), where 𝒄 denotes the ground truth. In Eq. (17), since 𝑓(⋅) effectively assists 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
9 


--- Page 10 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 6. Comparison between PFL, DFL, and DFF.
us in inferring all potential outcomes, the only uncertain parameter is 𝒄. When 𝒄 is specified, we can solve the optimization model 
Eq. (17) to obtain the optimal solution under this scenario. Specifically, the optimality conditions for deriving 𝒓∗(̂𝒄) and 𝒓∗(𝒄) are 
as follows: 
𝒓∗(̂𝒄) = arg max
𝒓
𝑧(𝒓; ̂𝒄)
(19a)
𝒓∗(𝒄) = arg max
𝒓
𝑧(𝒓; 𝒄)
(19b)
The key step in applying the decision-focused loss function shown in Eq. (18) is to backpropagate the loss value 𝑳(̂𝒄, 𝒄) to 
the prediction model 𝑀𝜃. A common approach is to employ the chain rule to compute the gradient of 𝑳(̂𝒄, 𝒄) with respect to the 
prediction model parameters 𝜽, which can be expressed as follows Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022): 
𝜕𝑳(̂𝒄, 𝒄)
𝜕𝜽
= 𝜕𝑳(̂𝒄, 𝒄)
𝜕𝒓∗(̂𝒄) ⋅𝜕𝒓∗(̂𝒄)
𝜕̂𝒄
⋅𝜕̂𝒄
𝜕𝜽
(20)
where 𝜕𝑳(̂𝒄,𝒄)
𝜕𝒓∗(̂𝒄) , 𝜕𝒓∗(̂𝒄)
𝜕̂𝒄, and 𝜕̂𝒄
𝜕𝜽 represent the gradients of the loss function with respect to the decision variables 𝒓∗, the decision variables 
with respect to the prediction output ̂𝒄, and the prediction output with respect to the prediction model parameters 𝜽, respectively.
In Eq. (20), the first and third terms on the right-hand side can be computed via standard gradient backpropagation, provided 
that the optimization model 𝑧(⋅) and the prediction model 𝑀𝜃 are differentiable. However, computing the second term 𝜕𝒓∗(̂𝒄)
𝜕̂𝒄 is 
more challenging, as there is no closed form for the mapping from prediction output to optimal decision, i.e., ̂𝒄→𝒓∗(̂𝒄), that can be 
differentiated directly. To address this, the following section will present surrogate loss functions as alternatives to decision regret.
4.2. Subgradient calculation based on surrogate loss function
Although the decision regret shown in Eq. (18) is straightforward, it is difficult to apply directly for training the prediction 
model due to the absence of a well-defined gradient and possible discontinuities. In this work, we adopt the SPO+ loss derived 
by Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022) as the surrogate loss function. We first consider the downstream optimization problem as follows:
min
𝒚
𝑞(𝒄) = 𝒄𝑻𝒚
(21a)
s.t. 𝒚∈𝑆,
(21b)
where 𝒚∈R𝐼 are the decision variables and 𝒄∈R𝐼 denotes parameters that need to be predicted. Here, 𝒄𝑻 represents the transpose 
of the vector 𝒄. Moreover, 𝑆⊆R𝐼 denotes the feasible region, which is nonempty, convex, and compact (i.e., a closed and bounded 
set). It is illustrated in Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022) that, for linear optimization problems, the assumptions that 𝑆 is convex and 
closed are without loss of generality. Additionally, 𝑞(𝒄) represents the objective function value of the optimization task.
For the linear optimization problem depicted in Eq. (21), the decision regret following the definition in Eq. (18) can be defined 
as: 
𝓁𝒚∗
SPO(̂𝒄, 𝒄) = 𝒄𝑻𝒚∗(̂𝒄) −𝒒∗(𝒄)
(22)
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
10 


--- Page 11 ---
J. Yang et al.
where 𝓁𝒚∗
SPO denotes the decision regret with respect to the optimal decision 𝒚∗. Here, 𝑞∗(𝒄) represents the optimal value of the 
objective function given parameter 𝒄. This is generally regarded as the SPO loss (short for ‘‘smart predict-then-optimize’’) in the 
literature.
However, considering scenarios where there are multiple solutions for 𝒚∗, Elmachtoub and Grigas (2022) introduce the 
unambiguous version of the SPO loss shown in Eq. (22), which calculates the worst-case scenario such that: 
𝓁SPO(̂𝒄, 𝒄) =
max
𝒚∈𝒀∗(̂𝒄)
{𝒄𝑻𝒚} −𝒒∗(𝒄)
(23)
where 𝓁SPO denotes the unambiguous SPO loss by selecting the ‘‘worst’’ decision 𝒚 within the set of optimal decisions 𝒀∗(̂𝒄). Based on 
the unambiguous SPO loss function 𝓁SPO, we now introduce the differentiable convex upper bound on Eq. (23) and its subgradient.
Lemma 4.1 (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022). Given a fixed realized vector 𝒄, the upper bound of the unambiguous SPO loss 𝓁SPO, denoted 
as 𝓁SPO+, can be derived as: 
𝓁SPO+(̂𝒄, 𝒄) = max
𝒚∈𝑆
{𝒄𝑻𝒚−2̂𝒄𝑻𝒚} + 2̂𝒄𝑻𝒚∗(𝒄) −𝒒∗(𝒄)
(24)
Here, the SPO+ loss 𝓁SPO+ is a convex function of the predicted parameter ̂𝒄, and a subgradient of 𝓁SPO+ with respect to ̂𝒄 can be 
calculated as: 
2(𝒚∗(𝒄) −𝒚∗(2̂𝒄−𝒄)) ∈𝜕𝓁SPO+(̂𝒄, 𝒄)
𝜕̂𝒄
(25)
Based on the surrogate loss function 𝓁SPO+, the gradient of the decision regret, as shown in Eq. (20) for the linear optimization 
problem Eq. (21), can be approximated as follows:
𝜕𝑳(̂𝒄, 𝒄)
𝜕𝜽
≈𝜕𝓁SPO+(̂𝒄, 𝒄)
𝜕𝜽
(26)
= 𝜕𝓁SPO+(̂𝒄, 𝒄)
𝜕̂𝒄
⋅𝜕̂𝒄
𝜕𝜽
(27)
4.3. Applicability of SPO+ loss for subsidy allocation problem
There are two major challenges in utilizing the approximated gradient shown in Eq. (26): (1) the applicability of the subsidy 
allocation problem to the SPO+ loss and (2) deriving the optimal solution with non-convex objective functions. We first provide the 
sufficient condition for applying the SPO+ loss.
Lemma 4.2 (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022). Let the SPO+ loss be defined as in Eq. (24). The SPO+ loss can serve as a surrogate loss 
function for decision regret under the following conditions:
1. The objective function of the optimization problem is linear.
2. The feasible region of the decisions is nonempty and bounded.
We can note from Lemma 4.2 that the SPO+ loss is only applicable to optimization problems with linear objective functions. 
However, it is apparent that the subsidy allocation problem presented in Eq. (17) is nonlinear. Below, we demonstrate the 
transformation of the optimization task, specifying the sufficient conditions under which the subsidy allocation problem satisfies 
the requirements outlined in Lemma 4.2. Based on this, we further introduce the subgradient of the SPO+ loss for optimizing the 
subsidy allocation problem.
Proposition 4.1.  The original optimization problem for subsidy allocation presented in Eq. (17) can be reformulated as a linear optimization 
problem with nonlinear constraints, as follows: 
max
𝒓
𝒛(𝒘, 𝒄) = 𝒄𝑇𝒘
(28a)
s.t. 
𝒓∈𝑆′
(28b)
𝒘= 𝒌⊙𝑓(𝒓)
(28c)
where ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product, and 𝒘 represents the transformed decision variables defined in Eq. (28c). In this context, 
𝒌= [𝑘1, 𝑘2, … , 𝑘𝐼] is defined as 𝑘𝑖= ̄𝐺𝑖(1 + 𝜆𝑝𝑖), and 𝑓(𝒓) = [𝑓(𝑟1), 𝑓(𝑟2), … , 𝑓(𝑟𝐼)] is a vector-valued function applied to the vector 
𝒓. Additionally, 𝑆′ denotes the feasible region of the original decision variable 𝒓.
A sufficient condition for the subsidy allocation problem shown in Eq. (31) to satisfy the conditions presented in Lemma 4.2 is that 𝑓(⋅)
is bounded and well-defined over the feasible set 𝑆′ of decisions 𝒓. The corresponding subgradient based on the SPO+ loss can be calculated 
as:
𝜕𝓁SPO+(̂𝒄, 𝒄)
𝜕̂𝒄
= −[2(𝒘∗(𝒄) −𝒘∗(2̂𝒄−𝒄))]
(29)
= 2𝒌⊙[𝑓(𝒓∗(2̂𝒄−𝒄)) −𝑓(𝒓∗(𝒄))]
(30)
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
11 


--- Page 12 ---
J. Yang et al.
We now provide the proof of Proposition 4.1.
Proof. We first elaborate the transformation of the optimization problem from Eqs. (17) to (28). Eq. (17) can be firstly rewritten in 
vector form such that: 
max
𝒓
𝒛(𝒓, 𝒄) = 𝒄𝑻(𝒌⊙𝑓(𝒓))
(31a)
s.t. 𝒓∈𝑆′
(31b)
 Let 𝑤𝑖= 𝑘𝑖𝑓(𝑟𝑖), then Eq. (31) can be transformed into Eq. (28), and the objective function in Eq. (28) is linear with respect to the 
transformed decision variable 𝒘.
Concerning the constraints, since 𝒓 lies within a closed polyhedral set 𝑆′, it suffices to prove that 𝒘, as a transformed decision 
variable, also resides within a nonempty and bounded set. Given the conditions that 𝑓(𝒓) is bounded and well-defined over the 
closed polyhedral set 𝑆′, we can conclude the following properties of the transformed decision space 𝑆′′ for 𝒘::
Non-emptiness of 𝑆′′: Since 𝑆′ is nonempty and 𝑓(𝒓) is well-defined for all 𝒓∈𝑆′, the mapping 𝒓↦𝑓(𝒓) must also yield a 
nonempty set of elements for 𝒓∈𝑆′. Consequently, the feasible set for 𝒘= 𝑓(𝒓) ⊙𝒌 is nonempty, as there exists at least one 𝒓∈𝑆′
for which 𝒘= 𝑓(𝒓) ⊙𝒌 is well-defined.
Boundedness of 𝑆′′: Since 𝑓(𝒓) is bounded over 𝑆′, there exists a constant 𝑈> 0 such that for all 𝒓∈𝑆′,
|𝑓(𝑟𝑖)| ≤𝑈
∀𝑖∈.
Thus, each component of 𝑓(𝒓) is bounded. Given that 𝒘= 𝑓(𝒓) ⊙𝒌 and that 𝒌 is a fixed vector, the product 𝒘= 𝑓(𝒓) ⊙𝒌 is also 
bounded. Specifically, there exists a constant 𝑈′ = 𝑈⋅|𝑘𝑖|𝑚𝑎𝑥 such that:
|𝑤𝑖| ≤𝑈′
∀𝑖∈.
This demonstrates that the feasible set for 𝒘 is bounded.
To conclude, the feasible set 𝑆′′ for 𝒘= 𝑓(𝒓) ⊙𝒌 is both nonempty and bounded. Therefore, the subsidy allocation problem 
presented in Eq. (17) satisfies the conditions outlined in Lemma 4.2 for application with the SPO+ loss.
Based on Proposition 4.1, we can now apply the SPO+ loss to the subsidy allocation problem with theoretical guarantees.
The other significant challenge is to obtain the optimal solution for the optimization problem Eq. (17). As 𝑓(⋅) can be an arbitrary 
user-defined function or even machine learning models, it raises concerns about the solvability of the potentially non-convex 
optimization problem where the black box occurs in the objective function. To address this issue, we propose a complementary 
solution in Appendix B, where we reformulate problem Eq. (17) as an integer programming model. In this way, we can ensure that 
the resulting model remains compatible with the introduced DFL algorithm.
5. Decision-focused fine-tuning for non-differentiable prediction models
In real-world applications, a major challenge of applying DFL is that it can only be utilized with differentiable prediction models. 
This limitation prevents direct adjustments to the simulation models used for deriving predictions. In other words, when the upstream 
prediction is non-differentiable, the gradient term 𝜕̂𝒄
𝜕𝜽 presented in the gradient calculations of decision regret Eq. (20) and SPO+ 
loss Eq. (27) becomes infeasible. Moreover, as DFL treats parameter prediction as an intermediate result, biases can be introduced, 
which may cause the parameters to lose their physical meaning. To address these issues, we adopt a Decision-Focused Fine-tuning 
(DFF) mechanism proposed by Yang et al. (2025), which shifts the emphasis from directly training a prediction model to fine-tuning 
an existing one.
The main idea of DFF is to fine-tune the prediction output ̂𝒄 from an existing prediction model 𝑴𝜽 to enhance the final decision 
quality. This approach ensures that the corrected predictions ̃𝒄 remain within an acceptable range of the original model’s predictions, 
i.e., ̂𝒄. The framework is shown in Fig. 7. The DFF framework can be formulated as a constrained optimization problem as follows: 
min
𝑭𝛼
E𝑥,𝑐
[𝓁SPO+(𝒄, ̃𝒄)]
(32a)
s.t.
D(̃𝒄, ̂𝒄) ≤𝜖
(32b)
̃𝒄= 𝑭𝜶(𝒙, ̂𝒄)
(32c)
̂𝒄= 𝑴𝜽(𝒙)
(32d)
where a predefined distance metric D between ̃𝒄 and ̂𝒄 is strictly constrained within the acceptable range 𝜖. The formulation Eq. (32) 
can be interpreted as enhancing decision quality by correcting the upstream prediction model 𝑴𝜽 via 𝑭𝜶 within the trust region 𝜖.
In this paper, we design the fine-tuning module 𝑭𝜶 to achieve a multiplication correction as follows: 
𝑭𝜶(𝒙, ̂𝒄) = 𝝍(𝒙, ̂𝒄) ⊙̂𝒄
(33)
where ⊙ is the Hadamard product and 𝝍 represent the weights of bias correction module. In summary, 𝑭𝛼 learns a multiplicative 
transformation based on the origin features 𝒙 and upstream predictions ̂𝒄, instead of updating the parameters 𝜽 of the prediction 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
12 


--- Page 13 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 7. Illustration of the decision-focused fine-tuning framework.
model 𝑴𝜽. This approach allows it to apply the SPO+ loss to general non-differentiable prediction models. We define the distance 
metric in the trust-region constraint Eq. (32b) as the percentage error, as follows: 
D𝑖(̃𝑐𝑖, ̂𝑐𝑖) = ||||
̃𝑐𝑖−̂𝑐𝑖
̂𝑐𝑖
||||
≤𝜖,
𝑖∈{1, 2, … , 𝐼}
(34)
Here, 𝜖 represents the maximum point-wise adjustable percentage. The percentage error distance normalizes the predictions of 𝑭𝜶
to unitless values, thereby avoiding considering the order of magnitude of unknown parameters to be predicted.
We apply the hyperbolic tangent transformation to ensure that the output of 𝑭𝜶(𝒙) strictly falls within the specified range and 
exhibits center-symmetry, i.e. ̃𝑐𝑖
̂𝑐𝑖∈(1−𝜖, 1+𝜖) (see similar examples in Su et al., 2020). The output layer of 𝝍(𝒙, ̂𝒄) can be represented 
as: 
𝝍(𝒙, ̂𝒄) = 1 + 𝜖𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝒉(𝒙, ̂𝒄))
(35)
where 𝒉(𝒙, ̂𝒄) denotes the output from the penultimate layer, and 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝜁) = 𝑒𝜁−𝑒−𝜁
𝑒𝜁+𝑒−𝜁 denotes the standard hyperbolic tangent function. 
The pseudo-code of the proposed method is provided in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Decision-focused Fine-tuning based on SPO+ loss
Input: Historic data 𝒙, prediction model 𝑀𝜃
Output: Trained fine-tuning model 𝑭𝜶
1: Initialize model parameters 𝜶 for prediction model 𝑭𝜶
2: Solve optimal solution of 𝒓∗(𝒄) ←𝒄 by Eq. (19)
3: for epochs do
4:  
for each batch of training data (𝒙, 𝒄) do
5:  
Step 1: Obtain the backbone prediction ̂𝒄 by Eq. (16)
6:  
Step 2: Obtain the corrected prediction ̃𝒄 by Eq. (33)
7:  
Step 3: Forward pass to solve optimal solution of 𝒓∗(2̃𝒄−𝒄) ←̃𝒄 by Eq. (19)
8:  
Step 4: Forward pass to compute SPO+ loss 𝓁SPO+(̃𝒄, 𝒄) by Eq. (24)
9:  
Step 5: Backward pass from 𝓁SPO+(̃𝒄, 𝒄) to update parameters 𝜶 with gradient by Eq. (30)
10:  
end for
11: end for
12: Return Fine-tuning model 𝑭𝜶 trained by SPO+ loss
6. Case study
In this section, we present a case study utilizing a real-world dataset from DiDi Chuxing in China to demonstrate the effectiveness 
of the proposed DFF method. Specifically, Section 6.1 introduces the dataset and experimental settings. Section 6.2 outlines 
five benchmarks for the subsidy allocation problem, along with the evaluation metrics. Additionally, Section 6.3 presents the 
experimental results, while sensitivity analyses regarding parameters and data sizes are discussed in Section 6.4.
6.1. Experiment settings
In this paper, we conduct experiments using real-world market data from DiDi Chuxing, covering the period from January 1, 
2024, to May 31, 2024. We select subsidy data for a specific service whose demand behavior demonstrates significant elasticity in 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
13 


--- Page 14 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 8. Distribution of GMV across different cities.
Fig. 9. Distribution of completion rate.
response to subsidies. The dataset encompasses all cities offering this service and includes daily information on subsidy amounts, 
GMV, and relevant transaction features used to predict completion rates for each city.
A notable characteristic of the data is the significant variation in GMV across different cities. Fig. 8 illustrates the average GMV 
for each city over the investigated time period, and this variation can be described from two perspectives. First, a small proportion 
of cities accounts for a large share of the market’s total GMV, driven by exceptionally high demand for the service. In contrast, over 
half of the cities collectively contribute only a small fraction of the total GMV. This variation in demand complicates the two-stage 
task, as the background information on GMV volume must be considered when predicting the uncertain parameters. To enhance 
our analysis, we categorize the cities into three groups: high-demand cities, medium-demand cities, and low-demand cities.
The distribution of the parameter to be predicted is illustrated in Fig. 9. The parameter exhibits a pronounced long-tail 
phenomenon, which presents challenges for accurate prediction. Additionally, the boxplots displaying the distribution of this 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
14 


--- Page 15 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 10. Boxplots of completion rate distribution for different categories of cities.
parameter across the three categories of cities are presented in Fig. 10. We observe that as GMV increases, the average completion 
rate also rises. This indicates a responsiveness of demand and supply to subsidy allocation. However, even after categorizing the 
data based on GMV characteristics, numerous outliers remain within each category. This suggests the complexities of accurately 
predicting the parameter, as it is influenced by multiple factors beyond just GMV.
For training the prediction model 𝑭𝜶, the dataset is randomly divided into training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 6:2:2. 
For each experiment with the same settings, we conduct 10 simulation runs using different random seeds to mitigate the effects of 
stochasticity and outliers. As for the configurations of neural networks, it is set to 3 layers with 64 neurons in the hidden layer, and 
ReLU is selected as the activation function. The batch size for the training process is set to 16 × 𝐼, which corresponds to processing 
data for 16 days across all cities in each batch. The model is trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−4, with a 
maximum of 1000 training epochs and an early stopping strategy (Su et al., 2021). All experiments are conducted on an Apple Mac 
Pro equipped with an M1 8-core CPU and 8 GB of RAM, running macOS Monterey. The code is implemented using Python (version 
3.11). The trade-off parameter 𝜆 is set to 0.7.
6.2. Benchmarks and evaluation metrics
In this paper, we adopt five additional different subsidy allocation strategies for benchmarking purposes. The details are as 
follows:
1. PFL (Prediction-Focused Learning): This method employs a neural network as the prediction model, which is trained to 
minimize the generalized mean squared error (MSE)
2. PFL-S (Simulation-then-Optimization): This method utilizes a semi-black-box prediction model embedded with a simulation 
model, as illustrated in Fig. 5. This approach can be viewed as a specific instance of the two-stage predict-then-optimize 
framework.
3. PFL-W (Prediction-Focused Learning with weighted MSE): This method shares the same structure with PFL, while the neural 
network is trained to minimize the weighted MSE (WMSE) as follows: 
WMSE = 1
𝐼
𝐼∑
𝑖=1
(𝑘𝑖𝑐𝑖−𝑘𝑖̂𝑐𝑖)2
= 1
𝐼
𝐼∑
𝑖=1
𝑘2
𝑖(𝑐𝑖−̂𝑐𝑖)2
(36)
The weight of each sample is set to 𝑘2
𝑖, where 𝑘𝑖 serves the weight in the optimization objective outlined in Eq. (28).
4. DFL-SPO+ (Decision-Focused Learning with SPO+ loss): This method directly utilizes the DFL approach, where a neural 
network serves as the prediction model, trained with the SPO+ loss defined in Eq. (24). The model’s input is identical to that 
of the simulation model.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
15 


--- Page 16 ---
J. Yang et al.
Table 2
Summary of results under different benchmarks.
 Strategy
PFL
PFL-S
PFL-W
DFL-SPO+
DFF-FY
DFF-SPO+(Ours) 
 Normalized regret
2.73%
2.46%
1.53%
1.35%
1.34%
1.26%
 
 Revenue improvement
0%
0.28%
1.23%
1.42%
1.43%
1.51%
 
 MSE
1.29 × 10−2
2.71 × 10−2
1.49 × 10−2
2.78 × 10−2
4.34 × 10−2
2.18 × 10−2
 
 Wrong decision rate
11.95%
9.13%
5.67%
4.07%
3.22%
3.15%
 
 Spearman’s rank
0.69
0.69
0.77
0.81
0.82
0.82
 
5. DFF-FY (Decision-Focused Fine-tuning with Fenchel–Young Loss): This method employs the decision-focused fine-tuning 
framework to adjust the simulation model as illustrated in Section 5. In this approach, the bias correction module is trained 
using Fenchel–Young Loss (Berthet et al., 2020), from which the decision loss is derived based on the perturbed method. 
Considering the reformulated optimization problem of subsidy allocation presented in Eq. (28), the perturbed Fenchel–Young 
loss can be calculated as follows: 
𝐿FY(̂𝒄, 𝒄) = 𝑄𝜎(̂𝒄) + 𝜎𝛺(𝒘∗(𝒄)) −̂𝒄𝑇𝒘∗(𝒄)
(37)
where 𝑄𝜎(𝑐) represents expectation of the perturbed optimizer and 𝜎𝛺(𝒘∗(𝒄)) is the Fenchel dual of 𝑄𝜎(𝑐). Moreover, the 
function of 𝑄𝜎(𝑐) is defined as: 
𝑄𝜎(𝒄) = E𝜼
[
max
𝒘∈{(𝒄+ 𝜎𝜼)𝑇𝒘}
]
(38)
where the random perturbation vector 𝜎𝜼 is the product of a random variable 𝜼 and a temperature parameter 𝜎. In this paper, 
𝜼 is sampled from a standard normal distribution and 𝜎 is set to 1 to control the strength of perturbing 𝒄.
6. DFF-SPO+ (Ours) (Decision-Focused Fine-tuning with SPO+ loss): This is the proposed method of this paper, where the 
prediction value is fine-tuned based on the simulation results. The SPO+ loss, as shown in Eq. (24), is employed to minimize 
the decision regret defined in Eq. (18).
To evaluate the performance of the subsidy decisions, we adopt the following evaluation metrics. First is the normalized regret 
defined as follows Tang and Khalil (2022) : 
Normalized Regret =
∑[𝑧(𝒓∗(𝒄), 𝒄) −𝑧(𝒓∗(̂𝒄), 𝒄)]
∑|𝑧(𝒓∗(𝒄), 𝒄)|
(39)
We further design a metric named the wrong decision rate (WDR), which measures the significant deviation of the derived 
subsidy decision from the optimal decision. The WDR 𝑊𝑖 for city 𝑖 within the planning horizon can be calculated as follows: 
𝑊𝑖= 1
𝑇
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
𝟏
(
|𝑟𝑖
∗(̂𝑐𝑡
𝑖) −𝑟𝑖
∗(𝑐𝑡
𝑖)| ≥𝑟𝑢𝑏−𝑟𝑙𝑏
2
)
(40)
where 𝟏(⋅) is a binary operator that equals 1 if the condition holds and 0 otherwise.
For the subsidy allocation problem, it is intuitive to analyze the ranking of the amount of subsidies across different distribution 
plans. Therefore, we adopt the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (Zar, 2005), which measures the correlation between two 
groups of data. We employ this coefficient to assess the discrepancy in the ranking of subsidies between the derived decisions and 
the optimal decision as follows: 
𝜌= 1 −
6 ∑𝐼
𝑖𝑑2
𝑖
𝐼(𝐼2 −1)
(41)
where 𝑑𝑖 represents the difference in ranks for each pair of corresponding values. Specifically, for each pair of values, the ranks of 
𝒓∗(̂𝒄) and 𝒓∗(𝒄) are computed, with 𝑑𝑖 representing the difference between these ranks for each city 𝑖. If there are ties in the ranks, 
the average rank for the tied values is used.
6.3. Experiment results
We first present the training process of the proposed DFF-SPO+ method, as illustrated in Fig. 11. During the training process, 
we observe that the normalized decision regret decreases across the training, validation, and test datasets, stabilizing around 200 
epochs. Moreover, the training curve for the training dataset shows the lowest value of decision regret, which is intuitive since the 
fine-tuning module is trained directly on this dataset. In contrast, the normalized regret for the validation and test datasets yields 
relatively similar results. Fig. 12 depicts the progressions of the SPO+ loss and the decision regret during training. We observe that 
as the number of epochs increases, both the SPO+ loss and the normalized regret continue to decrease, following similar trends. This 
indicates that the SPO+ loss is consistent with decision regret, supporting the analysis in Section 4 that the SPO+ loss is a suitable 
surrogate loss function for deriving the approximated decision-focused gradient of the subsidy allocation problem. Furthermore, the 
curve of the SPO+ loss is smoother compared to that of the decision regret, highlighting its superiority as a surrogate loss function.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
16 


--- Page 17 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 11. Progression of the decision regret during training for DFL-SPO+ method.
Fig. 12. Progressions of SPO+ loss and decision regret during training.
The performance of different benchmarks is summarized in Table 2. Firstly, we note that the proposed DFF-SPO+ method 
delivers the least decision regret, resulting in the highest improvement in platform revenue, which increases by 1.51% compared 
to the PFL method. Moreover, the DFL-SPO+ and DFF-FY methods rank second and third in both decision regret and revenue 
improvement, further demonstrating the advantages of the decision-focused training framework. However, by comparing the two 
DFF-based methods, we can find that the SPO+ loss is more effective as a surrogate function than the FY loss. Furthermore, under 
the same SPO+ loss setting, the DFF method achieves less decision regret than the DFL method, owing to its use of a constrained 
fine-tuning mechanism to the prediction backbone. On the other hand, although PFL yields the lowest mean squared error (MSE), 
it exhibits the highest regret. This indicates that minimizing fitting errors alone does not necessarily improve downstream decision-
making. In comparison, both PFL-S and PFL-W outperform PFL, with improvements of 0.28% and 1.23% in regret, respectively. This 
is because PFL-S obtains more reliable inputs for downstream tasks through a simulation model, while PFL-W facilitates downstream 
decision-making by applying weights related to the decision process in the training of the prediction model.
Fig. 13 depicts the wrong decision rate of subsidy allocation decisions across different benchmarks in three city categories. We 
observe that the proposed DFF-SPO+ method achieves the lowest wrong decision rate in both low-demand and high-demand cities, 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
17 


--- Page 18 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 13. Wrong decision rate over different city categories.
Fig. 14. Comparison of the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.
and the second-lowest rate in medium-demand cities. This indicates that DFF-SPO+ can effectively avoid wrong decisions under 
varying circumstances influenced by different city characteristics. Moreover, we conclude that the improvement of the decision-
focused approaches lies in their significant reduction of the wrong decision rate, which subsequently enhances platform revenue. 
Specifically, we note that all methods exhibit their highest wrong decision rates in medium-demand cities. However, DFF-SPO+ 
reduces the wrong decision rate by more than 70% compared to PFL in medium-demand cities, demonstrating that DFF-SPO+ can 
maintain strong performance even in complex situations.
We further present Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient for different benchmarks across various city categories in Fig. 14. The 
main idea behind rank correlation is to compare the similarity of the derived rankings of the subsidy portions to the optimal subsidy 
decisions derived from the ground truth. Once again, we observe that DFF-SPO+ achieves the highest Spearman’s rank correlation 
coefficient among all benchmarks, indicating that the ranking produced by DFF-SPO+ is closest to the optimal ranking. Moreover, 
the trend in similarity aligns consistently with revenue improvement and decision regret. This aligns with the findings of Zhou et al. 
(2023), which state that a key aspect of deriving an effective subsidy plan is accurately learning the ranking of importance among 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
18 


--- Page 19 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 15. Sensitivity analysis on the effect of parameter 𝜖.
different participants. Indeed, the decision-focused approaches demonstrate that decision loss can guide the prediction model to 
identify critical cities with greater importance, which is essential for effectively addressing the subsidy allocation problem.
6.4. Sensitivity analysis
We first conduct a sensitivity analysis on the effect of the trust-region parameter 𝜖 on DFF-based methods. The trends in decision 
regret and MSE are shown in Figs. 15(a) and 15(b), respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 15(a), the decision regret of DFF-SPO+ 
decreases with an increase in 𝜖 when 𝜖 is less than 0.7. However, the decision regret rebounds when 𝜖 exceeds 0.7. This occurs 
because, with a loose constraint on the trust region, the DFF-based approach degrades to the original DFL method, where the 
prediction output cannot be adjusted effectively. As for the decision regret of the DFF-FY method, it stabilizes when 𝜖 reaches 0.3. 
Meanwhile, the decision regret obtained using the SPO+ loss is lower than that of the FY loss across all settings of 𝜖, demonstrating 
the effectiveness of gradient-based training over perturbation-based training. Regarding the MSE results shown in Fig. 15(b), the 
SPO+ loss maintains a low and stable MSE across different values of 𝜖, whereas the MSE under the FY loss increases substantially as 
𝜖 grows. This divergence occurs because a larger 𝜖 defines a broader trust region, allowing more flexibility in adjusting predictions 
based on decision error. In such cases, the SPO+ loss continues to effectively constrain the deviation of predicted values from their 
ground truth, thereby preserving low prediction error (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022). In contrast, the FY loss fails to do so, as 
it is derived via perturbation smoothing and lacks both convexity and Fisher consistency (Berthet et al., 2020). These theoretical 
limitations undermine its ability to ensure stable and accurate predictions under relaxed fine-tuning constraints.
We further evaluate the performance of the DFF-based method with different training data sizes, with the associated results 
on decision regret and MSE shown in Figs. 16(a) and 16(b), respectively. In Fig. 16(a), we observe that as the training data 
size increases, the decision regret of the decision-focused approaches decreases consistently, whereas the PFL method exhibits a 
fluctuating downward trend. In particular, the PFL method performs markedly worse than the decision-focused approaches and 
can only achieve decision outcomes comparable to those of the PFL-S variants when utilizing the full dataset. This highlights 
the distinction between prediction-focused and decision-focused approaches. Moreover, the decision regret of the decision-focused 
approach using SPO+ loss is consistently lower than that of FY loss, further demonstrating that the SPO+ loss is more effective than 
FY. Regarding the MSE shown in Fig. 16(b), the PFL method continues to decrease and ultimately delivers the lowest MSE, as it 
is trained to directly minimize MSE. Furthermore, in all cases, both DFF-based variants maintain stable MSE, with the SPO+ loss 
consistently outperforming its FY counterpart in terms of MSE.
7. Conclusions
In conclusion, this study presents a novel decision-focused learning framework designed to optimize subsidy allocation at the 
city level. By combining the macro and micro subsidy allocation policies, we model the subsidy allocation problem at the city level 
as a bi-level optimization problem and reduce the bi-level formulation to a single-level optimization problem with a near-optimal 
approximation of the lower level. Moreover, we effectively captured the complex effects of subsidies through an explicit modeling of 
transaction flows rooted in real-world scenarios. This approach facilitates a deeper understanding of the interplay between pricing 
and matching dynamics. A key innovation of our framework is the training of the prediction model to minimize downstream decision 
loss, moving away from traditional generalized loss functions that primarily focus on fitting errors. This integration of prediction 
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
19 


--- Page 20 ---
J. Yang et al.
Fig. 16. Sensitivity analysis on the effect of training data size.
and optimization tasks creates a seamless end-to-end solution. To overcome the challenges associated with gradient backpropagation 
from decision loss to the prediction model, we introduced the SPO+ loss function, which we proved to be convex in the context 
of subsidy allocation. Additionally, we developed a decision-focused fine-tuning (DFF) mechanism to address the non-differentiable 
nature of the prediction model, incorporating a given backbone model and an additional bias correction layer. In this manner, the 
decision loss can be applied to any prediction model, including those that incorporate simulation elements.
Through empirical testing on real-world data from DiDi Chuxing, the proposed DFF framework achieved a revenue increase 
of 1.51% compared to traditional predict-then-optimize methods. Additionally, the DFF approach significantly reduced the wrong 
subsidy rate across cities with varying GMV. It also demonstrated robust performance, even when trained on limited data. This 
research highlights the effectiveness of decision-focused learning in improving optimization strategies and provides valuable insights 
for future applications in subsidy allocation for ride-hailing platforms. Future directions include incorporating spatial correlations 
among different cities when deriving decision loss (Bright et al., 2024) and developing a hierarchical subsidy allocation structure 
that effectively coordinates city-level and individual-level subsidy allocation (Su et al., 2023).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jiaqi Yang: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Lexiao 
Chen: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Conceptualization. Zicheng Su: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Wanjing Ma: 
Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition. Zhichao Zou: Software, Resources, Conceptualization. Kun An: Supervision, Funding 
acquisition, Conceptualization.
Acknowledgments
Financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52325210, 52472349, 72361137005 and 
52302411) and CCF-DiDi GAIA Collaborative Research Funds (No. 202409) are gratefully acknowledged.
Appendix A. Illustration of the a/b test for calibrating the function 𝒇(⋅)
To minimize the cost of the experiment, we randomly select a fixed number of passengers to form the control group, denoted 
as group 𝐴, which receives a nominal subsidy rate. The remaining passengers constitute group 𝐵. For the different groups 𝐴 and 𝐵
within the same city 𝑖, we can derive the per individual GMV of groups 𝐴 and 𝐵 as follows: 
𝐺𝑖𝐴
𝑁𝑖𝐴
=
̄𝐺𝑖𝐴
𝑁𝑖𝐴
[1 + 𝑓(𝑟𝑖𝐴)𝑐𝑖
] ,
(A.1)
and 
𝐺𝑖𝐵
𝑁𝑖𝐵
=
̄𝐺𝑖𝐵
𝑁𝑖𝐵
[1 + 𝑓(𝑟𝑖𝐵)𝑐𝑖
] ,
(A.2)
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
20 


--- Page 21 ---
J. Yang et al.
Table A.3
Comparison of fitting errors between 𝑓(𝑟) and 𝑐.
 Parameter
Method
MSE
MAPE  
 𝑓(𝑟)
Nonlinear least squares
2.53 × 10−3
6.56%  
 𝑐
Simulation-based prediction (PFL-S)
2.71 × 10−2
27.36% 
 
Neural network-based prediction (PFL)
1.29 × 10−2
17.25% 
where ̄𝐺𝑖𝐴 and ̄𝐺𝑖𝐵 denote the baseline GMV of the two groups, respectively. Moreover, 𝑁𝑖𝐴 represents the number of trips for 
group 𝐴 (with the nominal subsidy 𝑟𝑖𝐴), while 𝑁𝑖𝐵 denotes the number of trips in group 𝐵 with a subsidy rate of 𝑟𝑖𝐵. Since group 
𝐴 receives the nominal subsidy, the following approximation can be obtained: 
̄𝐺𝑖𝐴
𝑁𝑖𝐴
≈𝐺𝑖𝐴
𝑁𝑖𝐴
,
(A.3)
We then assume that the per individual GMV with nominal subsidies is the same for different groups within the same city, such 
that: 
̄𝐺𝑖𝐴
𝑁𝑖𝐴
=
̄𝐺𝑖𝐵
𝑁𝑖𝐵
,
(A.4)
Then, by combining Eqs. (A.1) to (A.4), we can derive the following equation: 
𝐺𝑖𝐵𝑁𝑖𝐴−𝐺𝑖𝐴𝑁𝑖𝐵
𝐺𝑖𝐴𝑁𝑖𝐵𝑐𝑖
= 𝑓(𝑟𝑖𝐵),
∀𝑖∈
(A.5)
Thus, (𝑟𝑖𝐵, 𝐺𝑖𝐵𝑁𝑖𝐴−𝐺𝑖𝐴𝑁𝑖𝐵
𝐺𝑖𝐴𝑁𝑖𝐵𝑐𝑖
) is a data point on the curve 𝑓(⋅). Based on sufficiently large data, we can fit the functional form of 𝑓(⋅).
The actual field experiment used to obtain the function 𝑓(⋅) was conducted by DiDi for the same service type investigated in 
this study. The fitting accuracy of 𝑓(⋅) is presented in Table A.3, alongside a comparison with the fitting accuracy of the completion 
rate 𝑐. We observe that the calibrated function 𝑓(⋅), obtained via the nonlinear least squares method, achieves high fitting accuracy 
in both MSE and MAPE, with values of 2.53 × 10−3 and 6.56%, respectively. In contrast, although the MSE values for predicting 
parameter 𝑐 remain relatively small (on the order of 10−2), the corresponding MAPE values are significantly higher. Specifically, the 
MAPE is 27.36% when using the simulation-based prediction method and 17.25% when using the neural network-based approach.
These results suggest that the calibrated function 𝑓(⋅), derived from actual field A/B test, provides reliable fitting performance. 
In comparison, the parameter 𝑐 is more difficult to predict accurately and should therefore be handled within a decision-focused 
learning framework.
Appendix B. Obtaining the optimal solution with different forms of 𝒇(⋅)
For different tasks, the form of 𝑓(⋅) can vary, and some of these forms may be non-differentiable and non-convex. In such cases, 
the classical solvers may struggle to obtain precise solutions, making it difficult to meet the various model assumptions within the 
DFL framework.
Inspired by piecewise linearization techniques, we can address this issue by reformulating the general optimization problem 
as an integer programming problem. In details, optimization problem Eq. (28) can be approximated using the following integer 
programming formulation: 
𝒛∗(𝒄) ∶= max
∑
𝑖∈
𝑐𝑖𝑤𝑖
(B.1a)
s.t.
𝑤𝑖= 𝑘𝑖
∑
𝑠∈
𝑓(𝑅𝑖𝑠)𝑞𝑖𝑠,
𝑖∈
(B.1b)
𝑟𝑖=
∑
𝑠∈
𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑞𝑖𝑠,
𝑖∈
(B.1c)
∑
𝑠∈
𝑞𝑖𝑠= 1,
𝑖∈
(B.1d)
∑
𝑖∈
̄𝐺𝑖𝑟𝑖≤𝐵
(B.1e)
𝑟𝑙𝑏≤𝑟𝑖≤𝑟𝑢𝑏,
∀𝑖∈
(B.1f)
𝑞𝑖𝑠∈{0, 1},
𝑖∈, 𝑠∈
(B.1g)
Here, the decision variable 𝑞𝑖𝑠 is binary, where 𝑞𝑖𝑠= 1 indicates that subsidy choice 𝑠 is selected for city 𝑖, and 𝑞𝑖𝑠= 0 otherwise. 
The constraint ∑
𝑠𝑞𝑖𝑠= 1 ensures that for each city 𝑖, exactly one subsidy scheme is chosen, thus maintaining the uniqueness of 
the allocation for each city. 𝑅𝑖𝑠 represents the subsidy rate for city 𝑖 when subsidy choice 𝑠 is selected, derived from the discrete 
sampling of 𝑟𝑖. As the dimension of 𝑠 increases, the proposed linearization approximation becomes more accurate.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
21 


--- Page 22 ---
J. Yang et al.
From the perspective of model implementation, 𝑓(⋅) can be arbitrary. Moreover, the structure of the transformed problem is 
similar to the multiple-choice knapsack problem (Sinha and Zoltners, 1979). Therefore, we can leverage related algorithms to 
improve solution efficiency (Pisinger, 1995; Akbar et al., 2006).
Data availability
The authors do not have permission to share data.
References
Agrawal, A., Amos, B., Barratt, S., Boyd, S., Diamond, S., Kolter, J.Z., 2019. Differentiable convex optimization layers. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 32.
Akbar, M.M., Rahman, M.S., Kaykobad, M., Manning, E.G., Shoja, G.C., 2006. Solving the multidimensional multiple-choice knapsack problem by constructing 
convex hulls. Comput. Oper. Res. 33 (5), 1259–1273.
Albert, J., Goldenberg, D., 2022. E-commerce promotions personalization via online multiple-choice knapsack with uplift modeling. In: Proceedings of the 31st 
ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. pp. 2863–2872.
Amos, B., Kolter, J.Z., 2017. Optnet: Differentiable optimization as a layer in neural networks. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 136–145.
Asadpour, A., Wang, X., Zhang, J., 2020. Online resource allocation with limited flexibility. Manag. Sci. 66 (2), 642–666.
Banerjee, N., Morton, A., Akartunalı, K., 2020. Passenger demand forecasting in scheduled transportation. European J. Oper. Res. 286 (3), 797–810.
Berthet, Q., Blondel, M., Teboul, O., Cuturi, M., Vert, J.-P., Bach, F., 2020. Learning with differentiable pertubed optimizers. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33, 
9508–9519.
Bertsimas, D., Kallus, N., 2020. From predictive to prescriptive analytics. Manag. Sci. 66 (3), 1025–1044.
Breiman, L., 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45, 5–32.
Bright, I., Delarue, A., Lobel, I., 2024. Reducing marketplace interference bias via shadow prices. Manag. Sci..
Castillo, J.C., Knoepfle, D., Weyl, E.G., 2024. Matching and pricing in ride hailing: Wild goose chases and how to solve them. Manag. Sci..
Chang, X., Wu, J., de Almeida Correia, G.H., Sun, H., Feng, Z., 2022. A cooperative strategy for optimizing vehicle relocations and staff movements in cities 
where several carsharing companies operate simultaneously. Transp. Res. Part E: Logist. Transp. Rev. 161, 102711.
Chang, X., Wu, J., Sun, H., Yan, X., 2023. A Smart Predict-then-Optimize method for dynamic green bike relocation in the free-floating system. Transp. Res. 
Part C: Emerg. Technol. 153, 104220.
Chen, B., Chen, S., Dowlatabadi, J., Hong, Y.X., Iyer, V., Mantripragada, U., Narang, R., Pandey, A., Qin, Z., Sheikh, A., et al., 2024. Practical marketplace 
optimization at uber using causally-informed machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19078.
Chen, J., Liu, X., Liu, W., Jiang, H., 2023. Two-sided instant incentive optimization under a shared budget in ride-hailing services. In: 2023 IEEE 39th International 
Conference on Data Engineering. ICDE, IEEE, pp. 3481–3493.
Chen, Z., Liu, K., Wang, J., Yamamoto, T., 2022. H-ConvLSTM-based bagging learning approach for ride-hailing demand prediction considering imbalance 
problems and sparse uncertainty. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 140, 103709.
Courcoubetis, C., Li, Y., Gao, S., Huang, Q., 2024. The impact of ride-hailing in city transportation. Front. Eng. Manag. 1–7.
Donti, P., Amos, B., Kolter, J.Z., 2017. Task-based end-to-end model learning in stochastic optimization. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 
Vol. 30, Curran Associates, Inc..
Elmachtoub, A.N., Grigas, P., 2022. Smart "predict, then optimize". Manag. Sci. 68, 9–26.
Feng, Y., Niazadeh, R., Saberi, A., 2024. Two-stage stochastic matching and pricing with applications to ride hailing. Oper. Res. 72 (4), 1574–1594.
Fielbaum, A., Alonso-Mora, J., 2020. Unreliability in ridesharing systems: Measuring changes in users’ times due to new requests. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. 
Technol. 121, 102831.
Gao, S., Ran, Q., Su, Z., Wang, L., Ma, W., Hao, R., 2024. Evaluation system for urban traffic intelligence based on travel experiences: A sentiment analysis 
approach. Transp. Res. Part A: Policy Pr. 187, 104170.
Gomez, J., Aguilera-García, Á., Dias, F.F., Bhat, C.R., Vassallo, J.M., 2021. Adoption and frequency of use of ride-hailing services in a European city: The case 
of Madrid. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 131, 103359.
Guan, J., Bao, Y., 2024. Does e-hailing perform better than on-street searching? An investigation based on the temporal-spatial distributions of idle vehicles. 
Front. Eng. Manag. 1–11.
Hao, X., Peng, Z., Ma, Y., Wang, G., Jin, J., Hao, J., Chen, S., Bai, R., Xie, M., Xu, M., et al., 2020. Dynamic knapsack optimization towards efficient multi-channel 
sequential advertising. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 4060–4070.
Jin, G., Cui, Y., Zeng, L., Tang, H., Feng, Y., Huang, J., 2020. Urban ride-hailing demand prediction with multiple spatio-temporal information fusion network. 
Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 117, 102665.
Li, Y., Sun, H., Lv, Y., 2021. Collaborative matching of ridesplitting and connection in the ridesourcing market. Fundam. Res. 1 (5), 517–533.
Li, R., Zhang, H., Sun, M., Teng, F., Wan, C., Pineda, S., Kariniotakis, G., 2024. Decision-oriented learning for future power system decision-making under 
uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.03680.
Liang, E., Wen, K., Lam, W.H., Sumalee, A., Zhong, R., 2021. An integrated reinforcement learning and centralized programming approach for online taxi 
dispatching. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 33 (9), 4742–4756.
Liu, K., Chen, Z., Yamamoto, T., Tuo, L., 2022a. Exploring the impact of spatiotemporal granularity on the demand prediction of dynamic ride-hailing. IEEE 
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 24 (1), 104–114.
Liu, S., He, L., Max Shen, Z.-J., 2021. On-time last-mile delivery: Order assignment with travel-time predictors. Manag. Sci. 67 (7), 4095–4119.
Liu, R., Hou, Z., 2023. UniTE: A unified treatment effect estimation method for one-sided and two-sided marketing. In: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International 
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. pp. 1472–1481.
Liu, Y., Jia, R., Ye, J., Qu, X., 2022b. How machine learning informs ride-hailing services: A survey. Commun. Transp. Res. 2, 100075.
Liu, T., Xu, Z., Vignon, D., Yin, Y., Qin, Z., Li, Q., 2023. Threshold-based incentives for ride-sourcing drivers: Implications on supply management and welfare 
effects. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 156, 104323.
Mandi, J., Kotary, J., Berden, S., Mulamba, M., Bucarey, V., Guns, T., Fioretto, F., 2023. Decision-focused learning: Foundations, state of the art, benchmark and 
future opportunities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13565.
Mo, D., Yu, J., Chen, X.M., 2020. Modeling and managing heterogeneous ride-sourcing platforms with government subsidies on electric vehicles. Transp. Res. 
Part B: Methodol. 139, 447–472.
Pisinger, D., 1995. A minimal algorithm for the multiple-choice knapsack problem. European J. Oper. Res. 83 (2), 394–410.
Rubin, D.B., 2005. Causal inference using potential outcomes: Design, modeling, decisions. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 100 (469), 322–331.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
22 


--- Page 23 ---
J. Yang et al.
Sadana, U., Chenreddy, A., Delage, E., Forel, A., Frejinger, E., Vidal, T., 2024. A survey of contextual optimization methods for decision-making under uncertainty. 
European J. Oper. Res..
Sinha, P., Zoltners, A.A., 1979. The multiple-choice knapsack problem. Oper. Res. 27 (3), 503–515.
Su, Z., Chow, A.H., Fang, C., Liang, E., Zhong, R., 2023. Hierarchical control for stochastic network traffic with reinforcement learning. Transp. Res. Part B: 
Methodol. 167, 196–216.
Su, Z., Chow, A.H., Zheng, N., Huang, Y., Liang, E., Zhong, R., 2020. Neuro-dynamic programming for optimal control of macroscopic fundamental diagram 
systems. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 116, 102628.
Su, Z., Chow, A.H., Zhong, R., 2021. Adaptive network traffic control with an integrated model-based and data-driven approach and a decentralised solution 
method. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 128, 103154.
Tafreshian, A., Masoud, N., 2022. A truthful subsidy scheme for a peer-to-peer ridesharing market with incomplete information. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 
162, 130–161.
Tang, B., Khalil, E.B., 2022. Pyepo: A pytorch-based end-to-end predict-then-optimize library for linear and integer programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14234.
Tang, W., Xie, N., Mo, D., Cai, Z., Lee, D.-H., Chen, X.M., 2023. Optimizing subsidy strategies of the ride-sourcing platform under government regulation. Transp. 
Res. Part E: Logist. Transp. Rev. 173, 103112.
Tian, X., Yan, R., Liu, Y., Wang, S., 2023. A Smart Predict-then-Optimize method for targeted and cost-effective maritime transportation. Transp. Res. Part B: 
Methodol. 172, 32–52.
Tirachini, A., 2020. Ride-hailing, travel behaviour and sustainable mobility: an international review. Transp. 47 (4), 2011–2047.
Wager, S., Xu, K., 2021. Experimenting in equilibrium. Manag. Sci. 67 (11), 6694–6715.
Wang, C., Shi, X., Xu, S., Wang, Z., Fan, Z., Feng, Y., You, A., Chen, Y., 2023. A multi-stage framework for online bonus allocation based on constrained user 
intent detection. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 5028–5038.
Wang, H., Yang, H., 2019. Ridesourcing systems: A framework and review. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 129, 122–155.
Wu, Z., Wang, L., Huang, F., Zhou, L., Song, Y., Ye, C., Nie, P., Ren, H., Hao, J., He, R., et al., 2022. A framework for multi-stage bonus allocation in meal 
delivery platform. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 4195–4203.
Xie, N., Tang, W., Zhu, J., Li, J., Chen, X.M., 2023. Understanding causal effects of ride-sourcing subsidy: A novel generative adversarial networks approach. 
Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 157, 104371.
Xu, Z., Yin, Y., Chao, X., Zhu, H., Ye, J., 2021. A generalized fluid model of ride-hailing systems. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 150, 587–605.
Xu, Z., Yin, Y., Ye, J., 2020. On the supply curve of ride-hailing systems. Transp. Res. Part B: Methodol. 132, 29–43.
Yan, Z., Wang, S., Zhou, G., Lin, J., Jiang, P., 2023. An end-to-end framework for marketing effectiveness optimization under budget constraint. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2302.04477.
Yang, J., Liang, E., Su, Z., Zou, Z., Zhen, P., Guo, J., Ma, W., An, K., 2025. DFF: Decision-focused fine-tuning for smarter predict-then-optimize with limited 
data. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 39 (25), 26868–26876.
Zar, J.H., 2005. Spearman rank correlation. Encycl. Biostat. 7.
Zhang, Q., Liu, Y., Fan, Z.-P., 2023. Short-term subsidy strategy for new users of ride-hailing platform with user base. Comput. Ind. Eng. 179, 109177.
Zhou, H., Li, S., Jiang, G., Zheng, J., Wang, D., 2023. Direct heterogeneous causal learning for resource allocation problems in marketing. In: Proceedings of the 
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. pp. 5446–5454.
Zhu, Z., Ke, J., Wang, H., 2021. A mean-field Markov decision process model for spatial-temporal subsidies in ride-sourcing markets. Transp. Res. Part B: 
Methodol. 150, 540–565.
Zhu, C., Wu, J., Guo, X., Sun, H., Lee, D.-H., 2024. Joint optimization of bus scheduling and seat allocation for reservation-based travel. Transp. Res. Part C: 
Emerg. Technol. 163, 104631.
Transportation Research Part C 180 (2025) 105301 
23 

